docs: Alloy Tutorial Sandbox (#1432)
grafana/alloy: docs/sources/tutorials/send-logs-to-loki.md

* You must have a basic understanding of {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} and telemetry collection in general.
* You should be familiar with Prometheus, PromQL, Loki, LogQL, and basic Grafana navigation.
<!-- INTERACTIVE ignore START -->
{{< admonition type="tip" >}}
Alternatively, you can try out this example in our interactive learning environment: [Sending Logs to Loki](https://killercoda.com/grafana-labs/course/alloy/send-logs-to-loki).

It's a fully configured environment with all the dependencies already installed.

![Interactive](/media/docs/alloy/Alloy-Interactive-Learning-Environment-(Doc-Banner).png)
{{< /admonition >}}
<!-- INTERACTIVE ignore START -->

<!-- INTERACTIVE page intro.md END -->

<!-- INTERACTIVE page step1.md START -->

## Install {{% param "PRODUCT_NAME" %}} and start the service

This tutorial requires a Linux or macOS environment with Docker installed.

{{< docs/ignore >}}

> > This online sandbox enviroment is based on an Ubuntu image and has Docker pre-installed. To install Alloy simply follow the links below and copy and paste the `Ubuntu/Debian` commands in the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This online sandbox enviroment is based on an Ubuntu image and has Docker pre-installed. To install {{% param "PRODUCT_NAME" %}} follow the links below, and copy and paste the `Ubuntu/Debian` commands in the terminal.
```

{{< /docs/ignore >}}

### Linux

Install and run {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} on Linux.

1. [Install {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}][Linux Install].
{{< docs/ignore >}}

> 1. To view the Alloy UI within the sandbox, Alloy must run on all interfaces. Run the following command before you start the alloy service:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To view the {{% param "PRODUCT_NAME" %}} UI within the sandbox, {{% param "PRODUCT_NAME" %}} must run on all interfaces. Run the following command before you start the {{% param "PRODUCT_NAME" %}} service.
```

   ```bash
   sed -i -e 's/CUSTOM_ARGS=""/CUSTOM_ARGS="--server.http.listen-addr=0.0.0.0:12345"/' /etc/default/alloy
   ```
{{< /docs/ignore >}}
1. [Run {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}][Run on Linux].

<!-- INTERACTIVE ignore START -->
### macOS

Install and run {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} on macOS.

1. [Install {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}][macOS Install].

1. [Run {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}][Run on macOS].
<!-- INTERACTIVE ignore END -->

You should now be able to access the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} UI at [http://localhost:12345](http://localhost:12345).

<!-- INTERACTIVE page step1.md END -->

<!-- INTERACTIVE page step2.md START -->

## Set up a local Grafana instance

In this tutorial, you configure {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} to collect logs from your local machine and send them to Loki.
You can use the following Docker Compose file to set up a local Grafana instance.
This Docker Compose file includes Loki and Prometheus configured as data sources.

{{< docs/ignore >}}

> > The interactive sandbox has a VSCode like editor that allows you to access files and folders. To access this feature, click on the `Editor` tab. Note that the editor also has a terminal that you can use to run commands. Since some commands assume you are within a specific directory our recommendation is to run the commands in `tab1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The interactive sandbox has a VSCode-like editor that allows you to access files and folders. To access this feature, click on the `Editor` tab. The editor also has a terminal that you can use to run commands. Since some commands assume you are within a specific directory, we recommend running the commands in `tab1`.
```

{{< /docs/ignore >}}

> 1. Create a new directory and save the Docker Compose file as `docker-compose.yml`.
>    ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a new directory and save the Docker Compose file as `docker-compose.yml`.

   ```bash
```

   mkdir alloy-tutorial
   cd alloy-tutorial
   touch docker-compose.yml
   ```

> 1. Copy the following Docker Compose file into `docker-compose.yml`:
>    ```yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Copy the following Docker Compose file into `docker-compose.yml`.

   ```yaml
```

          - --web.enable-remote-write-receiver
          - --config.file=/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml
        ports:
          - "9090:9090"
      grafana:
        environment:
          - GF_PATHS_PROVISIONING=/etc/grafana/provisioning
          - GF_AUTH_ANONYMOUS_ENABLED=true
          - GF_AUTH_ANONYMOUS_ORG_ROLE=Admin
        entrypoint:
          - sh
          - -euc
          - |
            mkdir -p /etc/grafana/provisioning/datasources
            cat <<EOF > /etc/grafana/provisioning/datasources/ds.yaml
            apiVersion: 1
            datasources:
            - name: Loki
              type: loki
              access: proxy
              orgId: 1
              url: http://loki:3100
              basicAuth: false
              isDefault: false
              version: 1
              editable: false
            - name: Prometheus
              type: prometheus
              orgId: 1
              url: http://prometheus:9090
              basicAuth: false
              isDefault: true
              version: 1
              editable: false
            EOF
            /run.sh
        image: grafana/grafana:11.0.0
        ports:
          - "3000:3000"
    ```

> 1. to start the local Grafana instance, run the following command:
>    ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To start the local Grafana instance, run the following command.

   ```bash
```

The examples run on a single host so that you can run them on your laptop or in a Virtual Machine.
You can try the examples using a `config.alloy` file and experiment with the examples.

### Create a `config.alloy` file

> To start create a `config.alloy` file within your current working directory:
> ```bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a `config.alloy` file within your current working directory.

```bash
```

touch config.alloy
```

### First component: Log files

> Copy and paste the following component configuration at the top of the file:
>    ```alloy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copy and paste the following component configuration at the top of the file.

   ```alloy
```

    local.file_match "local_files" {
        path_targets = [{"__path__" = "/var/log/*.log"}]
        sync_period = "5s"
    }
   ```

This configuration creates a [local.file_match][] component named `local_files` which does the following:

* It tells {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} which files to source.
* It checks for new files every 5 seconds.

### Second component: Scraping

> Copy and paste the following component configuration below the previous component in your `config.alloy` file:
> ```alloy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copy and paste the following component configuration below the previous component in your `config.alloy` file.

```alloy
```

The examples run on a single host so that you can run them on your laptop or in a Virtual Machine.
You can try the examples using a `config.alloy` file and experiment with the examples.

### Create a `config.alloy` file

> To start create a `config.alloy` file within your current working directory:

Author: Hi @clayton-cornell, so I changed the docker compose command to:
```
 docker compose up -d
```
This will run the docker compose in detached mode which will free the terminal up to allow other commands to be run

The following example demonstrates how you can filter out or drop logs before sending them to Loki.

> Copy and paste the following component configuration below the previous component in your `config.alloy` file:
> ```alloy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copy and paste the following component configuration below the previous component in your `config.alloy` file.

```alloy
```

### Fourth component: Write logs to Loki

> Copy and paste this component configuration below the previous component in your `config.alloy` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copy and paste this component configuration below the previous component in your `config.alloy` file.
```

```alloy
  loki.write "grafana_loki" {
    endpoint {
      url = "http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/push"

      // basic_auth {
      //  username = "admin"
      //  password = "admin"
      // }
    }
  }
```

This final component creates a [`loki.write`][loki.write] component named `grafana_loki` that points to `http://localhost:3100/loki/api/v1/push`.

This completes the simple configuration pipeline.

<!-- INTERACTIVE ignore START -->
{{< admonition type="tip" >}}
The `basic_auth` block is commented out because the local `docker compose` stack doesn't require it.
It's included in this example to show how you can configure authorization for other environments.
For further authorization options, refer to the [`loki.write`][loki.write] component reference.

[loki.write]: ../../reference/components/loki/loki.write/
{{< /admonition >}}
<!-- INTERACTIVE ignore END -->

{{< docs/ignore >}}

> > The `basic_auth` block is commented out because the local `docker compose` stack doesn't require it. It's included in this example to show how you can configure authorization for other environments.For further authorization options, refer to the [`loki.write`](../../reference/components/loki/loki.write/) component reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The `basic_auth` block is commented out because the local `docker compose` stack doesn't require it. It's included in this example to show how you can configure authorization for other environments. For further authorization options, refer to the [`loki.write`](../../reference/components/loki/loki.write/) component reference.
```

   ```

   {{< /code >}}
   <!-- INTERACTIVE ignore END -->

> 2. Call the `/-/reload` endpoint to tell {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} to reload the configuration file without a system service restart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Call the `/-/reload` endpoint to tell {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} to reload the configuration file without a system service restart.
```

Is it a requirement on the Killercoda side to have incrementing numbers in steps? Or just a result of edits?

For reference: https://grafana.com/docs/writers-toolkit/write/markdown-guide/#numbered-lists

Author: Hi @clayton-cornell not all and great catch! I believe  my vscode just auto increments and fail to catch them all

   ```bash
    curl -X POST http://localhost:12345/-/reload
   ```
   <!-- INTERACTIVE ignore START -->
   {{< admonition type="tip" >}}
   This step uses the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} UI on `localhost` port `12345`.
   If you chose to run {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} in a Docker container, make sure you use the `--server.http.listen-addr=0.0.0.0:12345` argument.
   If you don’t use this argument, the [debugging UI][debug] won’t be available outside of the Docker container.

   [debug]: ../../troubleshoot/debug/#alloy-ui
   {{< /admonition >}}
   <!-- INTERACTIVE ignore END -->
  
   {{< docs/ignore >}}

   > This step uses the {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} UI on `localhost` port `12345`. If you chose to run {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} in a Docker container, make sure you use the `--server.http.listen-addr=` argument. If you don’t use this argument, the [debugging UI][../../troubleshoot/debug/#alloy-ui] won’t be available outside of the Docker container.

   {{< /docs/ignore >}}

> 3. Optional: You can do a system service restart {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} and load the configuration file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Optional: You can do a system service restart {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} and load the configuration file.
```
